Right, so we're first going to examine
if order really does matter when declaring initializers,
constructors, and instance variables in code.
So, in our existing project, Objects,
we're going to create a new class called
initializerOrder in it.
(typing)
Right, so looking at this class,
we've got a static variable of type int,
called statementOrder,
we've got a method which updates
the static variable each time our method's are called
and you can see that one down there,
it's the method called clarify.
As you can see, it's updating the variable,
pulling the string passed to it
as well as the actual variable itself.
This is going to help us ultimately determine
the order that things are executed.
Now the class itself, looking back at the code here,
it's got three variable declarations.
You can see that I've set those up there.
Three initializer block declarations as well.
As well as a constructor method as well.
And they aren't in any particular order,
but again we're setting it up to see what happens,
and finally just before I run this,
in the InitializeOrder main method,
right down the bottom there you can see
where we're actually just creating a new instance
of our ordered class
and that sets up all the initialization code.
All right, so let's actually run this now.
All right, so that's the results.
So, looking at the code there,
you can see the constructor output,
which is basically the code on line 27,
that's not called until right to the end.
So, all variables and initializer blocks
are executed prior to code in the constructor
regardless of where in the class body
the constructor is declared,
because we've got an initializer block of code
below and above the constructor,
but the other thing to keep in mind is
in terms of this initializer block of code,
it's actually executed in the order
that it has been set up in the class.
And there you can see the output confirming that.
Now you can use instance variables in initializer blocks
and let's explore that now.
So, I'm going to create another new class,
we'll call this one initializerOrderMore.
(typing)
All right, so looking at this code
and this code's very similar in structure
to the code that we only just ran
with the following differences.
Firstly, I've changed the name of the package
PrivateClass to MixItUpClass.
Secondly, I changed the clarify method
to give it an additional parameter,
which is an int that we pass into the method.
I've added one more instance variable, int d,
you can see the declaration for that on line 49,
but we're actually changing that to
add a value to it in the constructor,
as you can see there.
I've also changed all calls to the clarify method,
and you can see I've got a few of them on
the screen here now.
So, now it passes variables of our choosing
as the second parameter.
Now I'm using an instance variable
in all cases but one to these method calls.
So, the one difference is the one
right on the top of the file there on line 11.
And finally we're pulling out
all the variables of A, B, C, D
into toString method, you can see there.
So, when we create a new instance of the class,
that we're doing in the main method
down the bottom of the screen there,
that will ultimately print out those values.
So, let's actually run this now.
Okay, there's the output.
So, from here we've learned that
we can use instance variables
in statements in the initializer blocks,
the assignment declarations
of instance variables themselves,
as well as the constructor.
But with that said,
this statement's not always true
for all instant variable references
in all initializer blocks.
And I'll take a closer look at that
in the Out of Ordinary video coming up in the next video.
For now, that's important that you know that
the order that the statements are executed in,
though we've been through that now,
and the exam may well quiz you about this order.
Remember that variable and initializer statements
are always executed in the same order that they're declared
but before any statements in a constructor
with the exception of the super() statement,
implied or explicit.
Now before we finish this video,
I want to just give you an example
of a static initializer.
Just review that.
So, let's go ahead and create a new class here.
We'll call it StaticInitializer.
(typing)
And again, this code's very similar
to what we've been working on in this video.
We've got a class here,
which has a static method called clarifyOrder,
you can see the call to let there,
and there's the actual method itself.
And this takes a string
and prints it to the consol after incrementing
the static variable statement order.
The statement order, you can see,
is defined on line 9.
This class also has two static variable declarations
and two static initializer blocks.
And you can see the static variable declarations
there on lines ten and 17.
Now the static initializer main method
down the bottom of the screen there,
prints out the static variable statementOrder
on staticInitExample class.
By doing that, that causes the class
to be loaded and initialised.
So, let's run this.
I see the output down the bottom.
Your output is similar to initializer block examples,
such that they're executed in the order
that they're declared.
These statements though only get executed
when the class itself is initialised.
Now we'll talk a lot more about
the static elements of a class
in a future video in this course.
So, in the last few videos,
we discussed the structure of declaring a class,
I deferred on topics on fields
and constructors for future videos,
but I also showed you some examples
of both initializer blocks
and static initializer blocks.
So, in the next video coming up,
we're going to take a look at more nuances
and oddities about class declarations
and initializer blocks.
See you in the next video.